INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 1
INTRODUCTION
TO ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE (AI)
TECHNOLOGY
GUIDE FOR TRAVEL & TOURISM LEADERS
January 2024
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 2
CONTENTS
FOREWORD ...........................................................................................................3
INTRODUCTION..................................................................................................4
Brief history of Artificial Intelligence (AI) 4
What is Artificial Intelligence & Why There is Global Interest Now 7
Algorithms : The Brains of AI 8
Data : The Fuel That Drives AI 12
Computing Power : The Machines Behind AI 16
Types of Artificial Intelligence 21
Generative AI 24
Global Digital Divide & AI Skills Gap 31
QUIZ....................................................................................................................... 34
ANNEX : AI TERMINOLOGY..........................................................................35
QUIZ ANSWER...................................................................................................40
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ................................................................................. 41
ENDNOTES.......................................................................................................... 42
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 3
In 1950, codebreaker and now celebrated computer scientist, Alan Turing, posed one of the most
interesting questions ever faced by humankind - can machines think?
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has occupied scientists for decades. But in 2023, it caught the attention of
global businesses, policymakers and civil society alike. In the UK, King Charles III called it “one of the
greatest technological leaps in the history of human endeavour”. The UN Secretary General described
AI as “unprecedented” and even the Pope stated that AI “has the potential to contribute in a positive
way to the future of humanity” before dedicating World Peace Day 2023 to the use of AI.
As business leaders in Travel & Tourism it is vital that we understand the opportunities and challenges
of this transformative technology. I am therefore delighted that the World Travel & Tourism Council
(WTTC) has partnered with Microsoft, one of our members and a leading technology company, to
bring you the very latest insights into AI and what it could mean for our sector.
What follows is the first report in a four-part initial series on artificial intelligence. We begin with an
introduction to AI: how it works, where it came from and the different types of AI available today.
Three further publications will explore how AI is currently being used in Travel & Tourism, and the fastmoving world of AI governance, safety and regulation.
By understanding these trends, we aim to help Travel & Tourism business leaders to prepare for the
future and navigate the complexities of AI. But this report isn’t just technical facts and figures. We also
examine how AI can help tourism grow and do good over the years to come, opening up new and
exciting possibilities for personalised, seamless and sustainable travel experiences.
Ultimately, AI is just an engine. The task now is to ensure that it fuels us towards a destination of our
choosing – a sector that is greener, safer, more prosperous and more free. After all, as Alan Turing said
back in 1949, we may be experiencing “only a foretaste of what is to come, and only the shadow of
what is going to be”. If we get it right with AI, that destination could be very bright indeed.
Julia Simpson
President & CEO
World Travel & Tourism Council
FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 4
“…It happened gradually, then suddenly…”
This famous quote from Ernest Hemingway’s 1926 novel, The Sun Also Rises could be used to describe some of
the world’s most profound technological changes. Small advancements accumulate and then all of a sudden,
the world is a different place.
That could describe the world before and after the birth of the internet and could now be applied to Artificial
Intelligence (AI), which has ‘gradually, then suddenly’ burst onto the scene after nearly a century of research. It
is almost impossible to browse the news or social media today, without seeing mention of Artificial Intelligence
and the magazines Time, Science, Cosmopolitan and The Economist (to name only a few) have all dedicated
cover stories to AI in 2023.
But where has AI come from and why is it suddenly such big news?
This report aims to answer those questions, by providing a general introduction to Artificial Intelligence
technology, its business applications and its relevance to Travel & Tourism.
BRIEF HISTORY OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
AI has gained significant attention in recent years – and especially in 2023 – but AI is not new and can trace its
history back to the development of computers after the Second World War, with the Dartmouth Conference in
1956 bringing together researchers from multiple fields to explore “thinking machines”. This is widely considered
the start of AI as a distinct field of study and where the term “Artificial Intelligence” was used for the first time
by the visionaries at that conference.
But it was not until the turn of the century that AI really came to the public’s attention, when the IBM Deep Blue
supercomputer beat chess grandmaster Gary Kasparov in 1997, with artificial intelligence algorithms developed
by IBM engineers. A few years later, in 2011, the IBM Watson computer won the US gameshow Jeopardy, after
INTRODUCTION
Cosmopolitan
www.cosmopolitan.com
Time
https://time.com
Economist
www.economist.com
Science
www.science.org
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 5
being trained on a huge data set. These events showed the world for the very first time that computers powered
with large amounts of data and artificial intelligence software – albeit very powerful computers out of reach of
the general public - were capable of outperforming humans at very complex tasks.
Over the past decade several companies have taken this a step further and developed AI systems that have
achieved incredible results and performed tasks not possible by humans, due to the huge scale and complexity
of the challenge. AlphaFold from Google Deepmind is one example. The programme uses AI to predict the
3D structure of nearly every protein in the human body. This improves our understanding of diseases like
Alzheimer’s and can massively accelerate research into medicines, vaccines and drugs. Healthcare is therefore
one of the most important and useful applications of AI.
In 2018 a painting called “Edmond de Belamy, from La Famille de Belamy” was sold at Christie’s auction house
in New York for a staggering $432,500 (USD). It was generated with artificial intelligence after being trained on
many images of portraits from the 18th and 19th centuries and was the first piece of AI art sold at auction. The sale
sparked a significant debate about the future role of humans in creative professions, such as art and
digital media.

 AI Painting (2018) AI Painting (2023) AI Photo (2023)
 Edmond de Belamy Girl with Glowing Earrings Pseudomnesia : The Electrician
But this was only the start of a ‘boom’ in AI generated creative content. In 2023, a museum in The Hague
(Netherlands) loaned the world famous, Girl with Pearl Earring (c. 1665) by Johannes Vermeer to an international
exhibition and temporarily replaced it in their gallery with an AI inspired version entitled Girl with Glowing
Earrings, with many visitors to the gallery believing it was a real painting. In April 2023 the German artist Boris
Eldagsen won the 2023 Sony World Photography Award with an image entitled Pseudomnesia: The Electrician,
before refusing the prize after revealing it was created by AI. (Pseudomnesia is Latin for fake memory!)
These images show how far AI creative technology has advanced in only a few short years, from an ability to
generate low quality AI portraits in 2018, to high quality AI paintings and photorealistic AI images today. Both
the Girl with Pearl Earring and Pseudomnesia images were created with AI software that is now available to
everyone online and is partly why AI has taken off with the public in 2023, enabling any of us to become
potential artists.
But paintings and photography are not the only form of art that has been shaped by AI. In 2023 the Grammys
announced that music created with AI would be eligible for awards and Paul McCartney announced he had used
AI to extract John Lennon’s voice from an old demo tape. In late 2023, this track was released as the final Beatles
Song Now and Then 1
 which drew considerable public attention to AI across all generations. Canadian singer
Grimes has also invited anyone to create new songs with an AI copy of her voice, offering to split the royalties
equally on any AI track that is commercially successful.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 6
Going a step further, an area of AI that is still in development is AI generated video. Imagine being able to
produce a corporate marketing video easily and in only a few moments on your office laptop, or even turning
your favourite book into a movie using AI. Whilst AI generated video does not currently exist at this advanced
level yet, it is clear that AI is rapidly moving forward and has huge potential for both businesses and society.
But there are also risks and concerns about the widescale adoption of AI, which are covered later in this report.
The use of AI has led to some highly publicised events, such as a strike by Hollywood actors and writers in 2023,
partly due to concerns about AI’s impact on the movie industry. Their concerns include the ability of AI to write
scripts and the potential to create an AI digital replica of an actor (or extra), which could be included in films,
without the physical actor present and potentially long after they have died. The full impact of AI on jobs of
the future is yet to be determined, but it is possible that labour strikes will be experienced in other industries
as AI rolls out further into society and other areas of work.
There is also a concern that AI could be used for disinformation (the deliberate sharing of false information),
especially to interfere with political elections. High quality, photorealistic – but fake – images have already gone
viral on the internet, such as an AI generated image of the Pope wearing a puffer jacket and an image purporting
to show the arrest of former US President Donald Trump. Both images were generated by AI and both are fake,
but they are photorealistic, very convincing, generated on a home computer in only a few minutes and were
shared very widely across the internet and social media. It is therefore clear that the wide scale implementation
of AI across society needs ‘guardrails’ for its appropriate use, which could range from formal regulations to
codes of conduct and best practice guidance. These options are discussed further in an accompanying WTTC
report on ‘AI Risks & Governance’.
Viral AI-generated (fake) images of the Pope and former US President Donald Trump
But not all celebrities are against AI and digital replicas – often known as ‘deepfakes’. For example World Cup
winning Argentinian footballer Lionel Messi has allowed a deepfake version of himself to advertise snacks, as
part of his sponsorship deal with PepsiCo. At the website www.messimessages.com anyone can generate and
download to their phone a short personalised deepfake video message from Messi who invites your friends by
name, to bring food and watch the big game with him – and it can even get Messi to provide the message in his
voice in English, Spanish, Portuguese or Turkish!
FAKE FAKE
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 7
Argentinian footballer Lionel Messi : Deepfake Messi Messages
AI has therefore been regularly hitting the news headlines and as with all new trends, a few high profile cases
can propel a technology that is initially only used by a few early adopters, into global mass adoption. For AI this
happened with the international release of a sophisticated AI powered chatbot, named ChatGPT, in November
2022 from a company called OpenAI. This caught the public’s attention, registering over 100 million users in only
2 months and making it (at the time) the fastest growing consumer product of all time. This tipped AI into the
public mainstream in 2023 and sparked the current worldwide interest in AI.
While ChatGPT was the first AI chatbot to reach mass consumption, others are now available including Google
Bard, IBM Watsonx.ai and Microsoft Copilot, with others produced around the world, such the Ernie AI
chatbot from Baidu in China.
These sophisticated AI chatbots are not the only way to use AI, but they have exposed the power of AI to the
general public, which everyone can now access on their desktop computers and smartphones (and through
digital connections to the ‘cloud’), unlike the 1990’s when the use of AI was limited to a very small number
of owners of supercomputers (such as IBM Deep Blue). The future of AI is exciting and evolving very fast. It
is impossible to accurately predict how AI will shape our lives over the next 5 to 50 years, but the following
section explains why now is a crucial moment for the future of AI and society.
WHAT IS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE & WHY THERE IS GLOBAL INTEREST NOW
One of the most important aspects of AI is that it is a multi-use technology. Like electricity it can be applied
in lots of different ways, to lots of different scenarios.
There is no single, universally accepted definition for Artificial Intelligence, but the Oxford English Dictionary
defines AI as “the capacity of computers, or other machines, to exhibit intelligent behaviour”. This means AI
systems appear to think, learn and act like humans and in some cases exceed the capabilities of humans. AI
systems can analyse vast amounts of data, solve complex problems, make decisions and perform creative tasks.
FAKE FAKE
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 8
Some AI technologies have been around for more than 50 years, but advances in computing power, the
availability of enormous quantities of data and new developments in software algorithms have led to major
AI breakthroughs in recent years. It is these three components of advanced algorithms, data and computing
power, that explain how machines can exhibit intelligent behaviour and why AI has suddenly exploded into our
everyday lives.
Algorithms tell computers what to do. Data tells computers what to learn.
Computing power gives machines the power to learn and make decisions
ALGORITHMS : THE BRAINS OF AI
‘Traditional programming’ involves encoding human knowledge and experience into a set of precise rules that a
computer can follow, step-by-step, which make the computer appear to respond intelligently.
These rules, called algorithms, tell computers how to perform tasks and in traditional programming are often
expressed in an ‘IF-THEN-ELSE’ format, which resembles a decision tree. For example to create a ‘digital doctor’,
an algorithm might look like:
IF the patient has a fever
THEN prescribe Drug X
ELSE send the patient home
The intelligence in traditional computer systems comes directly from human knowledge and expertise being
recorded into a format that a computer can process. Humans can read this ‘computer code’ and understand
how these digital systems make specific decisions and can therefore identify mistakes and improve the system.
For example, in the ‘digital doctor’ scenario, new clauses could be added to deal with special cases, or to reflect
new medical knowledge. For example:
IF the patient has a fever AND is allergic to Drug X
THEN prescribe Drug Y
ELSE prescribe Drug X
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 9
This example now starts to illustrate a key limitation of traditionally programmed systems. To develop a useful
and reliable ‘digital doctor’, a huge number of rules and exceptions would be required that the system would
very quickly become very large and very complicated. Thousands of IF-THEN-ELSE rules would still be unlikely
to capture all of a real doctor’s expertise and experience gained over time. Therefore traditional programming
of ‘intelligent systems’ is best suited to constrained environments which do not change much over time and
where the rules can be strictly defined. A good example of this could be an intelligent ‘tax calculator’ which
when presented with an individual’s financial income and other relevant circumstances could efficiently review
a series of ‘IF-THEN-ELSE’ rules to calculate their tax liability.
 Traditional Programming Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Unlike traditional programming, AI systems are not explicitly coded in a series of precise steps, but instead
‘learn’ how to solve a problem by examining training data. In the example above, a traditional programme (in
red on the left) goes through a series of defined steps and pre-programmed decision points at A, B and C to
reach an outcome D (in green), whereas in the AI example (in blue on the right) the system calculates the best
route to the outcome (the snake to point 2) based on the data it has been trained on (at point 1), not on explicitly
defined and pre-programmed decision points. AI systems can also continuously ‘learn from experience’ and
therefore the route taken to the outcome might be different each time the AI system is run (like a car driver
taking different routes through a city based on experience of traffic conditions at different times of day).
Returning to a ‘digital doctor’ example, an ‘AI digital doctor’ could be trained on thousands (or millions!) of
medical scans from sick and well patients to learn how to detect tumours, without following pre-defined rules
which are otherwise very difficult to codify and write. Many human doctors may say that experience plays a
significant role in clinical diagnosis, but an AI system can be trained on far more x-ray images than a doctor could
ever experience, leading to AI systems having remarkable capabilities in areas such as breast cancer detection.
For example a Swedish AI study in 2023 found that AI-supported breast cancer screening (the analysis of
mammogram images) was as good as two radiologists working together 2
. It also reduced their workload by
50% and led to 20% more cancers being detected early for treatment 3
. This illustrates some of the incredible
capabilities of AI and its benefit to society.
But this also leads to an important concept in AI called ‘Explainable AI’. It is possible to verify the output of an
AI system as correct (for example did a patient really have cancer or not), but it may not be possible to know
exactly how the AI system got to a decision or outcome, as the AI has calculated the ‘interim steps’ (e.g. the blue
snake in the diagram above) by itself, without human programming of the specific steps to be taken. AI systems
are therefore sometimes referred to as ‘black boxes’ with details of exactly how they work and operate - in
some cases - not fully known, or understood. This can even include their developers, as they too can often
only verify the output and not the steps taken by the AI.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 10
‘Explainable AI’ is therefore an active and ongoing field in which researchers are trying to understand and
articulate how AI systems reach an output. This is crucial to improve trust in artificial intelligence systems (i.e.
to understand the magic inside the black box and to turn a ‘black box’ into a ‘glass box’).
The ‘digital doctor’ example nicely illustrates why ‘explainable AI’ is so important (in this case for both the
patient and the doctor) to understand why an AI system has made a decision and believes a patient has breast
cancer before sending them for intrusive cancer treatment.
When considering how an AI system is constructed, there are two primary methods for how an AI system
‘learns’ to perform a task, which are machine learning and deep learning.
•	 Machine Learning : Machine Learning (ML) systems can learn from huge amounts of data and
continuously improve their performance over time when provided with more and/or better quality
training data. With this ‘knowledge’ gained from training data, machine learning powered AI systems
can then make predictions (such as for weather forecasting), or recognise patterns in data (such as for
image and speech recognition).
•	 Deep Learning : Deep Learning (DL) is a more sophisticated subset of Machine Learning and uses
complex processes inspired by the human brain called Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). How neutral
networks function is beyond the scope of this ‘Introduction to AI’ report, but deep learning systems
can excel at very complex tasks such as generating new works of art and medical drug discovery.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 11
Researchers Yann LeCun, Geoffrey Hinton and Yoshua Bengio are credited with laying the foundations for
how AI systems can ‘learn’. Their pioneering research on deep learning in the 1990’s and early 2000’s led to major
breakthroughs and their work is now used in a variety of AI powered applications, from self-driving cars to
medical diagnosis. In 2018 the three researchers – nicknamed the ‘Godfathers of AI’ - were awarded the Turing
Award, which is considered the highest honour in computer science (equivalent to a Nobel Prize) for their
fundamental contributions to artificial intelligence.
Media nicknamed “Godfathers of AI”4
The Turing Award is named after Alan Turing who was a brilliant British mathematician. He decoded the German
Enigma machines during the Second World War (which were considered impossible to crack) by building one of
the world’s first computers and was one of the main architects of modern computer science following the war.
He is often considered one of the ‘founding fathers’ of modern computing.
In 1950 Alan Turing published a groundbreaking paper called ‘Computing Machinery and Intelligence’ which
introduced the ‘Turing Test’ for artificial intelligence. This is still used today to test a machine’s ability to exhibit
intelligent behaviour and if it is indistinguishable from a human. At this time (early 2024) no computer has
decidedly passed the Turing Test, but there have been some very convincing contenders. Modern, sophisticated,
AI chatbots (such as Google Bard and Microsoft Copilot) can be very difficult to distinguish from a human.
The Turing Test is also a useful way to measure the progress of AI research, and since 1950 has helped to raise
international awareness of the potential for machines to think and behave like humans.
Whether an AI system uses machine learning, or deep learning techniques to ‘learn’, there are different ways
that AI algorithms can be ‘trained’, but the most common approaches are:
•	 Comparing AI-generated outcomes or predictions to the correct answer: this is known as ‘Supervised
Learning’ in which Al models are trained on data that has been correctly labelled (for example an AI
animal recognition system could be trained on images of animals correctly labelled as cats or dogs).
•	 Finding patterns in data: this is known as ‘Unsupervised Learning’ in which AI models are trained on
data that has not been labelled. In this case the AI system learns by finding patterns in the data (for
example edges, shapes, features, or colours in images of animals that are common to cats or dogs).
•	 Trial & Error: this is known as ‘Reinforcement Learning’ in which AI models ‘learn by doing’. Each
outcome of the AI training is either mathematically rewarded or punished, in a ‘trial and error’
feedback loop (for example an AI animal recognition system that identified a certain breed of dog as
a cat would be ‘punished’, but ‘rewarded’ it if correctly identified it as a dog, even though it had not
seen that breed before)
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 12
At the core of every AI system is a set of algorithms (often using machine, or deep learning) and AI training
techniques (such as supervised, unsupervised or reinforcement learning) which determine how the system
processes information, learns patterns and makes decisions. As new algorithms are developed artificial
intelligence is becoming increasingly capable. But AI requires two other important components to be successful
– data and computing power.
DATA : THE FUEL THAT DRIVES AI
“Data is the new oil” is a phrase often associated with the digital age. Data is the fuel behind modern computing
and AI algorithms, allowing them to learn, find relationships in data and make informed predictions and decisions.
In today’s world, huge volumes of data are created as we go about our everyday lives. From text messages, emails,
documents and social media posts, to photographs and videos on our smart phones. Humanity is generating
massive amounts of information every day and even more data is created by millions of sensors around the
world and in our homes, cars, cities, public transport infrastructure and factories.
An often quoted statistic from a 2013 study 5
 is that 90% of the worlds data has been generated in the last
2 years. That rate is likely to be even quicker today. A 2023 paper by the European Parliament on ‘Artificial
Intelligence Threats & Opportunities’ 6
 estimates that by 2025 the volume of data produced in the world each
year could be 175 zettabytes (up from less than 1 zettabyte a year generated in 2010, which is a 175 x increase in
the volume of data in just 15 years). To put that in context, a top-of-the-range laptop in 2024 may come with
a 1 terabyte hard drive, which is a billion times smaller than a zettabyte. Therefore the volume of global data
produced in a single year in 2025, may be equivalent to 175 billion laptop computers.…or 21 laptops for every
person on earth!
Data Bytes Size
1 Kilobyte (KB) 1,000 103
1 Megabyte (MB) 1,000,000 106
1 Gigabyte (GB) 1,000,000,000 109
1 Terabyte (TB) 1,000,000,000,000 1012
1 Petabyte (PB) 1,000,000,000,000,000 1015
1 Exabyte (EB) 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 1018
1 Zettabyte (ZB) 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 1021
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 13
The volume of digital data in the world is rising so fast, and getting so large, that in 2022 scientists
formally agreed two new units of measurement for the first time in 31 years. These are the Ronnabyte
(RB) and the Quettabyte (QB). A Ronnabyte is a billion, billion, billion bytes (!) and a Quettabyte is a
thousand Ronnabytes…or 1 followed by 30 zeros! Scientists believe this will be sufficient for at least
the next 25 years, but the relentless pace of digital innovation means we may all be using Quettabytes
quicker than anyone expected!
Data Bytes Size
1 Ronnabyte (RB) 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 1027
1 Quettabyte (QB) 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 1030
This data explosion is largely driven by three factors:
1. Increasing numbers of smartphones and internet devices: the number of devices connected to the
internet grows every year. There are several estimates for the total number of networked devices in
the world, but all agree that it is many billions of devices. The CISCO Annual Internet Report 2023
7
 estimates there are 29.3 billion networked devices in the world, which is more than 3 x the global
population of 8 billion people (in 2023).
2. Growth of social media: social media platforms generate many terabytes of text, video and audio data
every day (1 terabyte = approximately 1500 CD’s) with billions of messages and posts made every minute.
In 2020, during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Head of WhatsApp (Will Catchcart) issued a
tweet stating that approximately 100 billion messages were being exchanged every day on WhatsApp
alone and it is estimated that videos shared on platforms such as TikTok and YouTube account for over
half of all internet traffic. Social data is rising at an incredible pace, but is also very useful for AI systems
to understand human behaviour.
3. New data collection and storage technologies: new technologies, such as sensors placed throughout
our cities, energy grids and transport infrastructure, are generating huge amounts of data on human
usage patterns. Similarly the ‘Internet of Things (IoT)’, which are the networked everyday items (such
as fitness trackers and Smart TV’s) are growing in popularity and producing new streams of data. The
CISCO Annual Internet Report 2023 estimates that of the 29.3 billion connected devices, 14.7 billion are
IoT devices. Nearly 50% of these are connected home appliances (such as home security systems) and
30% are connected car applications (such as networked vehicle diagnostics tools, emergency calling
systems and in car entertainment platforms).
This volume of data is also leading to a significant rise in cloud computing and data storage centres, with the
U.S. hosting 10x more data centres than any other country in the world (in 2023) 8
.
These extremely large and very complex datasets are often called ‘Big Data’ and are characterised by their
volume, velocity, variety and veracity, commonly referred to as the 4 V’s.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 14
This exponential rise in the quantity, availability, quality and diversity of data around the globe is powering
the current wave of AI technology. Data provides the information required for AI models to learn and
improve, and is the fuel for AI systems to undertake very complex tasks at scale.
In particular ‘big data’ supports the rise of AI in the following ways :
1. Training Data: AI systems require substantial amounts of training data to learn patterns. This makes
their predictions and decisions more accurate, which is especially important in areas such as self-driving
cars where massive datasets of images and videos, from many different road scenarios, are captured and
used to train AI algorithms, which can then perceive and navigate complex environments by themselves.
2. Feature Extraction: large and diverse datasets help AI algorithms to accurately identify and extract
features from within data. This enables more accurate insights from AI systems, such as AI powered
image recognition tools.
3. Model Performance: big data enhances the performance and robustness of AI models, allowing them
to handle a wide range of situations and inputs. This is especially important in sectors such as healthcare,
where AI systems can analyse extensive patient and medical data to assist in diagnosis, treatment and
drug discovery.
4. Predictive Analytics: large datasets and AI can be used by businesses to forecast trends, customer
behaviour and market shifts. This provides companies with actionable insights and helps with corporate
decision making.
5. Personalisation: when AI systems can access large volumes of data on human behaviours, preferences,
and interactions they can provide tailored suggestions and experiences for users. This is useful for
e-commerce and social media platforms to suggest products, content, or services tailored to an
individual user.
6. Natural Language Processing (NLP): NLP models, such as AI powered chatbots, virtual assistants and
language translation systems, benefit from diverse and extensive language data, such as books, articles
and social media posts. This allows an AI NLP model to understand and generate realistic human-like
language very effectively.
7. Real-Time Decision Making: as the ‘velocity’ of big data accelerates, in areas such as banking transactions,
AI systems can process and analyse this data in (near) real time to provide instant recommendations, or
decisions, for functions such as fraud detection.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 15
Companies have been working towards becoming more data-driven for many years, with some now using cloud
computing to store and manage their vast quantities of data on remote cloud-based servers (rather than on
premises computers), in either ‘data lakes’ or ‘data warehouses’ (or both).
A data warehouse is a repository that stores structured data, in a highly organised and optimised way. They
can be thought of as very large, neatly organised, filing cabinets Data warehouses could store information such
as booking data, hotel occupancy rates, flight schedules, pricing information, financial transactions, web traffic
statistics or marketing campaign performance data. This structured way of storage can be easily searched and
is very good at quickly finding specific pieces of information such as “how many people booked trips to the
Caribbean last year?” or “what was the average cost of a hotel room in Paris this summer?”.
Alternatively a data lake is a repository that can store all types of unstructured data, such as social media
posts, images, videos, customer feedback surveys, or online reviews. A data lake can be thought of as a big,
open room, into which all sorts of information can be thrown, in an unstructured and disorganised manner. This
form of storage is good for collecting many different types of data and for keeping all the relevant information
(within privacy limits), even when you’re not sure how, or when, it could be used in the future.
When the best aspects of a data warehouse and data lake are merged into one data management solution it is
called a data lakehouse.
The application of AI to each system has its advantages. For example:
AI applied with a data warehouse could:
•	 Optimise pricing strategies, based on historical booking data
•	 Predict customer preferences and recommend personalised travel packages
AI applied with a data lake could:
•	 Analyse social media sentiment to gauge public opinion on different travel destinations
•	 Use image recognition with social media photos to identify the most popular tourist attractions
•	 Analyse customer feedback to identify areas of concern and improve customer services
The combination of AI, data warehouses, data lakes and cloud infrastructure, provides a scalable and flexible
environment for managing and gleaning insights from different forms of big data. Used together they can help
a travel company provide amazing and personalised travel experiences!
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 16
COMPUTING POWER : THE MACHINES BEHIND AI
Training AI systems typically requires a lot of data. This data can be very large and very complex and needs to
be processed very quickly, which requires a lot of computing power.
For example, sophisticated AI chatbots (such as Google Bard, Microsoft Copilot) were trained on datasets that
included hundreds of billions of words (for comparison the Bible contains fewer than one million words). To
download this volume data on a typical home internet connection and then process it for AI training could take
hundreds of years on a standard computer. This task therefore requires a special type of computing power.
Let’s imagine you wanted to learn everything on the internet. In 2022 there were approximately 5.75 billion
webpages online. If a person spent one minute studying every page, it would take a human approximately 11,000
years to ‘learn the internet’ (without any breaks!). The most advanced supercomputers in 2023, which contain
advanced computing power, are now able to process this vast amount of data and use AI techniques (such as
deep learning algorithms) to ‘learn’ all this information in only a few months! This remarkable advancement in
modern computing power is enabling the current wave of AI innovations and powering many applications
of AI that were simply not possible only a few years ago.
The history of increasing computing power can be traced back to the 1960’s, when Gordon Moore (a co-founder
of Intel) observed that the number of transistors on an integrated circuit was doubling around every two years.
This became known as ‘Moore’s Law’. This doubling led to exponential growth in the power of computer chips,
which has enabled computers small enough, powerful enough and cheap enough to now sit on all of our desks
and power the smartphones in our pockets. But to achieve AI breakthroughs required even more computing
power.
In the 1990’s a company called NVIDIA popularised the term ‘Graphics Processing Unit’ (GPU), which was
typically an electronic circuit board that plugged into a computer to accelerate its power. This became a critical
piece of technology for computer gamers (and later Hollywood), as it enabled very fast and realistic rendering
of graphics and special effects. GPU chips led computer games to advance from pixilated images to realistic
graphics in just a few years, to the point where they are now almost indistinguishable from real life. The images
below show just how much computer graphics, powered by GPU chips, have improved in only the last 3 years.

The rapid advance of GPU chips partly explains why now is a global moment for AI. As GPU technology evolved
for computer games, a key innovation was their ability to process tasks in parallel (rather than sequentially
as in normal computers) and it turns out the accelerated parallel processing required to create lifelike
graphics in computer games and movies is ideal for powering AI applications and especially deep learning
systems, such as sophisticated AI chatbots. Therefore GPU computer chips, originally from the gaming industry,
eFootball Computer Game Graphics of Argentinian Lionel Messi Real Lionel Messi
 (2021 to 2023) 41
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 17
are now a core and essential part of AI. This need has, in turn, propelled NVIDIA to become one of the world’s
most in demand and valuable companies, reaching a market valuation in excess of $1 trillion in 2023, joining only
5 other companies in the world to have reached that level (who are Alphabet [the parent company of Google],
Amazon, Apple, Microsoft and Saudi Aramco)
Demand for these cutting-edge GPU chips is growing very rapidly around the world, but only a few companies
and countries have the specialist knowledge and ability to produce them. Computer chips are therefore
a source of geo-political tension, especially between the U.S., China and the EU, who each have strategic
ambitions for AI and have therefore announced plans, or legislation, to strengthen their local chip design and
manufacturing capabilities.
China, for example, has published a ‘Made in China 2025’ roadmap 9
 which aims to improve the country’s
position as a manufacturing superpower by 2025 (including in the production of semiconductor chips). At
the time of publication of this report, negotiations are underway to raise 300 billion Yuan (RMB) 10 for an
investment fund that can be put towards chip manufacturing in China. In Europe the ‘EU Chips Act’ 11 aims to
secure the region’s supply of semiconductors by investing €42 billion (EUR), alongside a three pillar strategy to
improve EU semiconductor R&D, increase the EU’s production capacity and to set up a new EU monitoring and
crisis response mechanism for any future chip shortages. In the U.S. the ‘US Chips & Science Act’ 12 includes
$52 billion (USD) for semiconductor R&D, manufacturing and workforce development. The Act also includes a
25% tax credit to encourage companies to build chip manufacturing plants in the U.S. (estimated to be worth
$24 billion [USD]) and when combined with other US regulations, places export restrictions on US designed
semiconductor technology. Such large investments and semiconductor strategies by the world’s great
powers illustrate the strategic importance of this chip technology.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 18
At the 2023 World Economic Forum in Davos, Intel CEO
Pat Gelsinger said “there is no innovation without
semiconductors”. As the global economy becomes
increasingly dependent on digital technology, he
argued that “the world needs more geographically
balanced and resilient chip supply chains” 13.
This is because many computer chip companies
(including NVIDIA) are ‘fabless’ organisations, meaning
they design and sell chips, but do not manufacture
them. Their manufacturing is outsourced to a
specialised ‘semiconductor foundry’, such as TSMC
(Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company)
which is by far the largest chip manufacturer in the
world with approximately 55% market share. The
second largest is Samsung in South Korea, with
approximately 15% market share in 2023.
This means around 70% of the world’s computer chips are manufactured by just two organisations. These
power not only AI systems, but everything that requires a semiconductor chip, from cars to household
appliances. As the world emerged from the COVID-19 pandemic, this dependence was brought into sharp focus
with very public halts to car production lines due to a global chip shortage. Quite simply without TSMC the
global digital economy would grind to a halt. Raising awareness of this risk has led to further geo-political
tensions surrounding the future of Taiwan, where TSMC is based.
The very limited number of GPU chip designers and manufacturers around the world has therefore led several
major technology companies to develop their own chips to power AI applications, including Amazon, Apple,
Google, IBM, Microsoft and Tesla. Chip designers and manufacturers including Intel, AMD and Qualcomm are
also building new production facilities. TSMC, for example, is building a plant in Arizona (its first production
facility outside of Taiwan) and Intel is building a new plant in Ohio, with tax credits provided by the US Chips &
Science Act.
Since 2016, Google has also developed its own chip that is specifically designed for AI, called a TPU (Tensor
Processing Unit). Although GPU chips are at the core of most AI computing power today and can perform
tasks in parallel, a TPU chip takes this a step further and can perform ‘matrix calculations’ which significantly
accelerates machine learning tasks. These differences could be thought of like a traditional newspaper printing
press – a normal laptop computer could print one letter at a time, a GPU chip could print a whole line of text
at a time, and a TPU chip could print an entire page at a time.
Example chip producers (not an exhaustive list)
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 19
CPU vs GPU vs TPU
The ‘matrix’ capability of TPU chips makes them ideal for training and deploying very large AI models. They
are already installed in many Google data centres, so when you use Google Translate today (which involves AI
processing in the background), TPU’s are probably powering your query 14 15. The latest generation of Google
TPU’s (TPU v5) are capable of nearly 400 trillion calculations per second!
But despite this incredible ability, the real magic happens when thousands of chips are interconnected to create
a single supercomputer that is capable of handling very demanding AI workloads. In 2020 Microsoft built the
supercomputer used to train ChatGPT 16. It used 10,000 GPU chips and cost millions of dollars. At the time it was
not only the largest supercomputer built in the public cloud, but also the 5th largest supercomputer
ever built 17.
Semiconductor chip technology and cloud infrastructure have only recently made such large scale, powerful
supercomputers possible. But most members of the general public and users of AI chatbots (or other
sophisticated AI systems) probably have no idea about the massive scale of computing power required behind
the scenes to train and drive these advanced AI capabilities.
These very large and very expensive supercomputers can take up entire warehouses of space and cost many
millions of dollars to build and run. This has caused concern with some university academics and national
governments who may not be able to afford these very large investments, or have the technological capability
to build and operate supercomputers themselves. There is therefore a legitimate concern that the computing
power required for AI may mean that AI cannot be studied by everyone, or benefit everyone in society. This
disparity may lead to a greater ‘digital divide’ in the world (discussed later in this report).
It is important that the benefits of AI are able to reach everybody on the globe and some governments have
taken a strategic decision to invest in national computer infrastructure capable of training and running large
scale AI applications. The UK, for example, committed £900 million (GBP) in March 2023 to build an exascale UK
supercomputer 18 called ‘Isambard AI’ 19 20 (named after the famous British engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel)
that will enable ‘researchers in the UK to better understand climate change, power the discovery of new drugs
and maximise the potential of AI’.
An exascale supercomputer is a computer that can carry out 1 quintillion calculations a second – that is a billion,
billion, calculations per second (or 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 calculations every second!), a metric known as
an ‘exaflop’.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 20
UK £900 million (GBP) investment in an ‘exascale’ computer for AI research
But Travel & Tourism companies wishing to develop their own AI applications do not need their own dedicated,
or purpose-built supercomputer, because several technology companies (including Google, Microsoft, IBM and
others) provide access to AI models and data management tools with their cloud technology which connects
to the providers supercomputers.
For example, a Travel & Tourism company could take a sophisticated AI chatbot that has been ‘pre-trained’ on a
supercomputer (with huge amounts of data from the internet) and with a technology partner ‘fine tune’ it for
their specific business tasks. This uses far fewer computing resources and allows the Travel & Tourism business
to use their own data that is specific to their company, combined with the already pre-trained general data from
the internet. As this paper is an ‘Introduction to AI’, it does not include more details on ‘fine tuning’ AI models
for specific business uses, but additional AI guidance material on this topic may be developed by WTTC in
the future.
Cloud computing is the general term for anything that involves delivering computer resources over the internet.
Companies, or individual users, can now pay for and access large amounts of computing power on demand via
the cloud. But when referring to the total cloud computing system, which involves not only the processing
power (e.g. GPU’s or TPU’s), but also the memory, networking and storage requirements, the term ‘compute’
is used. Therefore the jigsaw puzzle image at the start of this chapter, with the three core elements of AI, is
more often referred to as Algorithms + Data + Compute (rather than computing power) to reflect the essential
elements of AI.
As these three core components of AI get increasingly more capable, accessible and affordable to businesses
and the public, what AI can really achieve in the future is yet to be determined!
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 21
TYPES OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
As noted at the start of this chapter, artificial intelligence is a multi-use technology, with many different
applications. There are therefore different ways that AI systems can be categorised, but they are normally
segmented into one of three categories - either by the way they learn, by their capabilities or by
their functionality.
The previous section of this report summarised the different ways that AI systems can be categorised based on
the way they learn. This includes machine learning and deep learning, with different techniques for training
these AI systems including supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning.
The second useful way to group, or classify, an AI system is based on its capability, which means an AI system
delivers either artificial narrow intelligence (ANI), artificial general intelligence (AGI), or artificial super
intelligence (ASI).
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 22
The third useful way to classify an AI system is based on its functionality. For many years this involved an AI
solution either being considered as an Expert System, or as Predictive AI, but now also includes a relatively new
field of artificial intelligence functionality called Generative AI.
An AI Expert System is a smart computer program that uses AI to simulate the expertise of humans in a specific
area, such as for travel planning, medical diagnosis or financial advice. Expert systems contain a knowledge base
of rules and facts about a specific domain, which are combined with AI (in a system called an ‘inference engine’)
to reason through problems and provide advice, or recommendations.
For example a travel AI expert system could help travellers to plan and book their trips. This would start with
the collection of a large amount of data relating to travel, such as information on destinations, hotels, airlines,
restaurants, excursions and travel regulations, which would be fed into a knowledge base. Travellers could interact
with the AI expert system through a friendly user interface (such as a website, smartphone app, or chatbot) in
a natural, conversational way to communicate their travel dates, budget and interests, and the AI ‘brain’ could
provide personalised recommendations and itineraries. To complete the process, AI expert systems can also be
integrated with booking platforms to enable travellers to make reservations directly through the system.
AI expert systems therefore capture human knowledge and combine it with AI to provide expert level advice
and conclusions. The knowledge base represents the domain expertise, while the inference engine provides the
AI reasoning capabilities. Benefits of AI expert system include:
•	 Time & Cost Savings: AI expert systems can search through large amounts of data and generate travel
itineraries very quickly and efficiently.
•	 Personalised Customer Service: AI expert systems can take account of a traveller’s individual preferences
and requirements to provide them with highly tailored recommendations.
•	 Wide Expert Knowledge: AI expert systems can draw from the expertise of many stakeholders who
have fed into the ‘knowledge base’, which for Travel & Tourism could include travel agents, travel
bloggers, tour operators and other travel professionals.
Predictive AI is another way to classify an AI system’s functionality and refers to AI that uses current and
historical data to make predictions about future events, outcomes, or behaviours. They do this by analysing
large amounts of data to identify patterns, trends and relationships that can help to anticipate the future.
A common form of predictive AI is weather forecasting, which analyses historical weather data and current
conditions to predict the likely future weather.
An example of how predictive AI can used in travel is for flight delay predictions. An airline may use a predictive
AI system to analyse a variety of historical and real time data including weather conditions, aircraft maintenance
issues, airport congestion and other factors that could impact delays such as air traffic control data. The AI
system can identify patterns in this data and create models that estimate the likelihood and potential length of
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 23
future flight delays, under various conditions. With this information airlines can better schedule crews, gates,
and other resources to proactively minimise passenger inconvenience. Predictive AI therefore allows airlines to
get ahead of potential disruptions to their operations.
Predictive AI can also be combined with other forms of data analytics to create more comprehensive and
powerful approaches to solving complex problems and gaining valuable business insights. Examples of other
data analytical techniques that can be combined with predictive AI include:
•	 Descriptive Analytics: this summarises the past using historical data and helps to answer questions
such as WHAT, WHERE and WHEN something happened by using methods such as dashboards, reports
and other visual imagery to see and analyse patterns. For example this could involve analysing flight
delay reports and displaying key information on a dashboard.
•	 Diagnostic Analytics: this aims to understand WHY something happened by investigating its root cause.
For example by analysing weather data and aircraft maintenance logs it may be possible to diagnose
why flight delays occurred. These important insights from diagnostic analytics can also improve the
accuracy of predictive AI models. For example, by understanding the reasons for past flight delays, it
can help to better predict potential future delays.
•	 Prescriptive Analytics: this suggests HOW to act in the future based on the data insights. By combining
predictive AI forecasts with prescriptive recommendations it enables better planning and responses to
potential future events. For example airlines could prepare and rapidly reallocate crews if significant
delays are predicted.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 24
GENERATIVE AI
Generative AI (sometimes abbreviated to “Gen AI”) is a relatively new form of AI that burst onto the global
scene in late 2022 with the release of a sophisticated AI chatbot called ChatGPT.
ChatGPT took the world by storm with its ability to generate intelligent and amusing written content that
resembles human speech, combined with its capability to generate useful, high quality content very quickly,
such as emails, poems, business plans, holiday schedules and much more.
As illustrated in the earlier chapters of this report, AI technology has been around for many years and routinely
used in applications such as weather forecasting, or email spam filters, but these are often hidden and unknown
to the users of systems. ChatGPT, along with other sophisticated AI chatbots released in 2023 such as Google
Bard and Microsoft Copilot, could be credited with really exposing the power and potential of AI to corporate
businesses and the mass general public.
AI chatbots are powered by generative AI, which is a type of AI technology that can produce new and creative
content such as text, imagery, video and audio, from a user ‘prompt’. It creates this new content based on the
prompt and what it has learned from very large quantities of training data (sometimes many millions of internet
pages) to produce a generative AI model.
An example of this is foundation models which can be defined as “AI models trained on a broad data set
that can applied to a wide range of downstream tasks” 21 .These enable anyone to automate projects and
generate amazing content on a standard computer. The diagram below illustrates just some of the possible
outputs (such as text, computer code, images and video) and tasks (such as producing marketing and advertising
material, website building, video editing and document summarisation) that generative AI foundation models
can achieve.
Generative AI Application Landscape
Generative AI has its origins in a 2017 Google research paper entitled “Attention Is All You Need” 22, which
introduced a new type of AI architecture for language understanding called ‘Transformers’. Many research
organisations, universities and companies have investigated this technique to develop innovative AI applications.
Since 2017, the number of scientific publications focussed on generative AI has grown fivefold and venture
capital (VC) investment in generative AI solutions reached $12 billion (USD) in the first six months of 2023 alone.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 25
Number of Scientific Publications on Generative AI (by year)
Generative AI’s ability to produce new, exciting and creative content is predicted to create considerable global
business and economic value, but also comes with potentially significant challenges and risks (discussed further
in the accompany WTTC report on ‘AI Risks & Governance’). As a result generative AI has taken centre stage in
many public, academic and political discussions. This can be illustrated by the huge rise in global news stories
and posts on X (formally Twitter) dedicated to generative AI worldwide, with international news stories on
generative AI increasing from just under 2000 in late 2022, to nearly 14,000 by June 2023. The number of posts
on X (tweets) rose from 7000 in October 2022, to 57,000 in March 2023 (an 8x increase) 23. The global interest in
this new form of AI is phenomenal and is therefore an important technology for all Travel & Tourism businesses
to recognise.
 Number of Global News Articles Number of posts on X (formally Twitter)


A specific type of generative AI foundation model is a large language model (LLM), which is a sophisticated AI
model designed to generate human like text responses to a user’s prompt. It is the underlying AI model driving
AI chatbots (such as Google Bard or Microsoft CoPilot). The user ‘prompt’ is commonly a text input, but could
also be something else, such as an image or audio input for example.
A prompt allows the user to provide instructions to an LLM (often an AI chatbot) in a natural conversational style,
which is understood by the AI in a process called natural language processing (NLP). This natural, conversational
way of providing instructions to an AI system is the same way that instructions are provided to ‘home smart
speakers’ and is a new, exciting and innovative way for humans to interact with computers.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 26
A simple example of a text prompt and response from a LLM could be:
Sophisticated AI chatbots, powered by LLM’s, are also able to remember the details and context of a conversation
and reply as part of a free flowing discussion. For example if the prompt “how does this compare to a cheetah”
is added after the above response, the AI system knows to compare it to Usain Bolt over 100m, without the
user specifically having to ask how a cheetah compares to the runner. This natural way of communicating and
remembering previous parts of a discussion is a how a human conversation would flow and is being replicated
by the generative AI system.
To achieve such impressive abilities, LLM models are typically trained on enormous amounts of text data
(sometimes called a ‘corpus’, meaning a large collection of documents) to learn the patterns, grammar, and
semantics of one, or more, languages and use AI deep learning techniques to understand and generate coherent,
conversational and contextually appropriate responses in only a few seconds.
LLM’s, such as those that power sophisticated AI chatbots, are remarkably versatile and accurate in comprehending
and generating text across a very wide range of topics and writing styles. Below are a few more examples of
complex prompts provided to an AI chatbot that demonstrate their ability to remember the previous parts of
a conversation, perform translation, summarise text, draw tables and populate them with content drawn from
multiple sources.
What is the world record for the 100m sprint?
The world record for the 100m sprint is 9.58 seconds, set
by Usain Bolt of Jamaica on 16 August 2009 at the World
Athletics Championships in Berlin, Germany.
AI
How does this compare to a cheetah?
A cheetah is significantly faster than a human. In a 100m race,
a cheetah would cross the finish line in about 5.95 seconds,
while Usain Bolt would take 9.58 seconds. Cheetahs have a
top speed of around 70 miles per hour, while Usain Bolts top
speed for the 100m sprint is approximately 23 miles per hour.
AI
Explain what WTTC does in 1 sentence that is
suitable for a WhatsApp message
WTTC is a global organisation that works with governments
and businesses around the world to promote the travel and
tourism industry
AI
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 27
1. La Junta Mundial de Viajes y Turismo (WTTC) es una
plataforma única para que los gobiernos interactúen con las
empresas para dar forma conjuntamente al futuro del Viaje
y Turismo y garantizar su competitividad, inclusividad y
sostenibilidad a largo plazo.
2. WTTC は、 高レベルの政府イベントに参加し、 連邦、 州、
地方政府と積極的に多利益関係者対話に参加し、 セクター
全体の連携を達成します。
3. Til að upplýsa ákvarðanatöku á opinberum vettvangi
framleiðir WTTC trausta rannsóknir og innsæi
leiðtogaskýrslur, frá neyðarbúnaði til áfangastaðar 2030, auk
mælanleiðra bestu framkvæmda sem spanna frá öryggi, þróun
starfsfólks, sjálfbærni og áfangastaðastjórnun.
Translate the first sentence to Spanish, the
second sentence to Japanese and the third
sentence to Icelandic
AI
Draw a table of reports published by WTTC in
2022 and include a short description of
each report.
Report Title Description
Economic Impact Research
This report provides an in-depth analysis of the economic impact of
the travel and tourism industry, both globally and in individual
countries. It also provides forecasts for the future of the
industry.
Digital Travel Portals This report provides guidance on how governments can implement a
digital travel portal to facilitate safe and seamless travel.
Codes to Resilience
This report identifies the key factors that will determine the
resilience of the travel and tourism industry in the face of future
shocks.
Destination 2030 This report assesses the readiness of global cities to achieve
sustainable tourism growth by 2030.
Nature Positive Travel
& Tourism
This report outlines the steps that the travel and tourism industry
can take to become nature positive, meaning that it contributes
more to the environment than it takes away.
Staff Shortages
This report examines the challenges that the travel and tourism
industry is facing in terms of staff shortages and proposes
solutions to address this issue.
Best Practices for
Short-Term Rentals
This report provides guidance on how to regulate short-term rentals
in a way that benefits both tourists and local communities.
AI
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 28
It is important to remember that the text output from the AI chatbot in the above examples is generated
entirely by AI and based on the vast amounts of information it has been trained on from the internet. It has not
simply copy-and-pasted these responses from the WTTC website, as these exact paragraphs, descriptions and
tables do not exist in this format on the WTTC website.
However in the last example, where the AI chatbot was asked to provide the months that the reports were
published, it has provided incorrect information. This is known as a ‘hallucination’ and is a feature of all AI
chatbots today. Sometimes they produce answers, information and statistics that look accurate and sound
convincing, but are in fact incorrect. This is due to the complex way that large language models produce their
output. Some common reasons for hallucinations are illustrated below.
Reasons for Generative AI Hallucinations
In the AI chatbot example above, the table is also incomplete as it has missed other reports published by
WTTC in 2022, including a report on ‘Critical Factors to Attract Hotel Investment’ (published in June 2022)
and a joint report with Harvard University on the ‘Circular Economy in Travel & Tourism’ (published in May
2022). Nevertheless, the AI has done a remarkable job of finding and correctly summarising the majority of
WTTC reports, in only a few seconds, from a single sentence text prompt asking for information on the reports
published by WTTC in 2022 (written in a natural conversational way).
Add a column including the month they were published.
AI Report Title Description Month Published
Economic Impact
Research
This report provides an in-depth analysis of the
economic impact of the travel and tourism industry,
both globally and in individual countries. It also
provides forecasts for the future of the industry.
February 2022
Digital Travel Portals
This report provides guidance on how governments can
implement a digital travel portal to facilitate safe
and seamless travel.
March 2022
Codes to Resilience
This report identifies the key factors that will
determine the resilience of the travel and tourism
industry in the face of future shocks.
June 2022
Destination 2030 This report assesses the readiness of global cities to
achieve sustainable tourism growth by 2030. September 2022
Nature Positive Travel
& Tourism
This report outlines the steps that the travel and
tourism industry can take to become nature positive,
meaning that it contributes more to the environment
than it takes away.
October 2022
Staff Shortages
This report examines the challenges that the travel and
tourism industry is facing in terms of staff shortages
and proposes solutions to address this issue.
November 2022
Best Practices for
Short-Term Rentals
This report provides guidance on how to regulate shortterm rentals in a way that benefits both tourists and
local communities.
December 2022
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 29
Hallucinations are a well known feature of current generative AI systems and many researchers are working
on solutions, so that future versions of AI systems will have improved accuracy and better performance. All
users of generative AI systems today (including Travel & Tourism businesses) should therefore be aware of
their current limitations and are advised to verify any AI generated outputs that may be business, safety or
operationally critical.
Whilst AI chatbots may be many peoples first introduction to generative AI applications there is a very rapidly
growing market of AI applications and open source AI models. Open source tools are freely available to
download and use and in some cases they can be manipulated to your exact user needs and with your own data
in a process called ‘fine tuning’.
The diagram below from Sequoia Capital (a U.S. venture capital firm) attempts to map the generative AI market
by use case 24 . It illustrates the many and varied generative AI applications available in September 2023, but this
still does not capture all available applications.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 30
Generative AI Market Map v3 (by Sequoia Capital)
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 31
This ‘explosion’ of generative AI applications has caused
many world leaders to call for a proper debate on the
opportunities and challenges related to generative
AI and the regulatory needs and guidelines required
for its safe and responsible use. The UK government
therefore hosted the world’s first AI Safety Summit in
November 2023.
Many countries are currently leveraging their existing
legal and policy frameworks to manage the risks of
AI, whilst in Europe the EU is advancing a continent
wide ‘AI Act’ to responsibly seize the opportunities
presented by AI. Many other multinational groups
including several UN bodies, the G7 and private
sector companies are also developing responsible AI
guidelines. These are discussed further in the ‘AI Risks
& Governance’ report from WTTC.
In September 2023, an OECD report prepared for the 2023 Japanese G7 Presidency identified seven common
challenges posed by generative AI that require international alignment and collaboration 23. The report noted
that international policy frameworks for generative AI should be inclusive and feature input from a diverse
range of stakeholders, not just ‘AI experts’ and include the perspectives of governments from both developed
and developing countries, private companies, civil society and interested sectors of the economy. This includes
international Travel & Tourism.
GLOBAL DIGITAL DIVIDE & AI SKILLS GAP
As noted earlier in this chapter, as AI systems access more high quality data and use greater computer power,
they become more accurate, creative and insightful. However it is also important to note that handling massive
amounts of data can present privacy, security and data governance challenges for AI developers and users and
that there is a significant data and ‘digital divide’ in the world.
The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) – the UN agency responsible for advancing digital technology
– estimates that 34% of the world has never been connected to the internet (in 2022), representing 2.6
billion people 25. Therefore a third of the world’s population does not have access to AI.
The ITU considers that ‘universal and meaningful digital connectivity’ 26 (defined as a ‘the possibility for
everyone to enjoy a safe, productive and affordable online experience’) should be a global priority. The ITU
states that the AI revolution should benefit everyone in the world and should not worsen the international
digital divide.
ITU data shows that the global youth are the driving force behind connectivity, with 75% of all 15-24 year olds
in the world now online, compared to 65% amongst the rest of the population. Sadly the affordability of entry
level fixed and mobile internet services is leaving populations in the least developed countries (LDCs) behind.
ITU data from 2022 finds that in a typical low income economy, the cheapest mobile broadband costs 9% of a
person’s income (over 6x the global average) and in those least developed countries 64% of the population is
not connected to the internet (almost double the global average of 34% who are not online).
To begin to address this issue, the UK and Canada announced an ‘AI for Development’ vision at the 2023 UN
General Assembly (UNGA) 27, which aims to boost local AI skills, innovation and computing power in the
world’s poorest nations, with an initial focus on Africa. Then UK Foreign Secretary, James Cleverly stated at the
UN launch that “the opportunity of AI is immense…and the UK alongside our allies and partners is making sure
that the fulfilment of this enormous potential is shared globally”
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 32
In addressing digital inequality, the science fiction writer William Gibson (who first used the term ‘cyberspace’
in his 1984 novel Neuromancer) is reported to have said over 30 years ago that “the future is already here, it’s
just not evenly distributed yet”. This could be used to describe the global digital divide and AI situation today.
The Worlds Offline Population : ITU Global Connectivity Report 2022
(Size of tile represents the country’s share of the world’s offline population)
At the annual UN mid-year policy discussions on urgent global issue in July 2023, the ITU Secretary General ,
Doreen Bodgan-Martin said that “in a world where 95% of the global population is within range of a mobile
broadband network, mere connectivity is not sufficient” adding “too many people who could go online decide
against it because they do not have the digital skills” 28. IT illiteracy and the digital skills gap are therefore
barriers to a successful AI future for everyone.
UN ITU Secretary General, Doreen Bodgan-Martin
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 33
This digital skills gap affects both developed and developing countries. In 2023, international HR and recruitment
company Randstad surveyed 7,000 employees in companies of all sizes, across 34 countries and found that only
13% of workers had been offered any form of AI training in the last 12 months 29. This is despite a huge global
surge in AI, with Randstad also observing a 20x increase in the number of new job postings across all industries
requiring AI skills in 2023 30. Their research also found that AI training was the third most requested form of
development requested by workers, after leadership and wellbeing training.
A similar result was found in the GitLab 2023 global survey of software development companies 31. It’s showed
that even when AI training was provided within organisations, there was a significant difference in the quality
and availability of training across seniority levels. Those lower in organisations were most concerned about
job losses from AI, yet were not provided the skills necessary to work with and alongside AI technology, with
the report noting that “although this suggests that organisations are making a top-down attempt to make AI
resources available to employees, those resources may not be adequate at lower levels”
Commenting on the report, the training organisation Skillsoft said “investing in reskilling and upskilling is vital
to ensure everyone can benefit from AI”. To ensure this, the firm argued “organisations must take a stronger
stance on training employees to use AI strategically and responsibly within their existing roles”. A 2023 global
survey of corporate executives by the IBM Institute of Business Values also found that most business leaders
estimate that implementing AI and automation within their company will require at least 40% of their
workforce to re-skill over the next three years 32.
But the thought of digitally retraining half, or more, of an entire workforce can seem like a daunting and
expensive task. That is why organisations, such as Microsoft, Google and IBM offer basic AI training for free via
their YouTube channel and website (such as online at Microsoft Learn 33, Grow with Google 34 or IBM Training 35), often in partnership with organisations such as LinkedIn Learning, Coursera and edX. In September 2023, IBM
also announced a plan to help close the AI skills gap by training 2 million people in AI by the end of 2026,
with a focus on underrepresented communities 36. To achieve this goal IBM is collaborating with universities
and training providers around the world to deliver adult education and launching new generative AI coursework
on topics such as ‘Prompt Writing’ and ‘Improving Customer Service with AI’ through IBM SkillsBuild 37.
Many online creators are also making videos on how to use AI and there have been more than 1.7 billion views
of videos related to AI tools on YouTube in 2023 alone 38. More sophisticated, paid for training courses are also
available from several universities (both in person and online) and many training providers who may also offer
consulting services to tailor training to your specific organisational needs.
A simple, useful tool, for training an entire workforce can also be peer-to-peer training, where an employee
who attends a training course (or workshop/seminar) shares the key learnings with other members of the team.
Awareness training and co-mentoring, where teams coach each other and swap expertise in one-to-one
sessions, can also allow organisations to make the best use of staff that already have specific digital skills.
Many countries and companies are right at the start of their AI journey, with AI education and training essential
to ensuring everyone benefits from AI. But this is not only the responsibility of businesses and starts with
government driven digital education in schools, with AI training made available to everybody, at all stages of
life, and especially in the least developed counties to help close (not expand) the global ‘digital divide’.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 34
Can you tell the difference between AI and human
generated content?
Can you identify if the below text and images are generated by AI?
The answer is at the back of this report…
Q : Explain how AI could change travel and tourism over the next 10 years ?
Example Answer 1:
Over the next decade, AI is set to reshape the travel and tourism industry in various ways. With its ability to process
vast amounts of data, AI will offer personalised travel recommendations, optimise travel operations, and enhance
customer service through virtual assistants and chatbots. AI will act as a virtual travel concierge, providing realtime assistance during travel and AI-powered smart recommendations will help travellers make better informed
decisions. However, the industry will need to navigate ethical considerations and strike a balance between the
benefits of AI and maintaining a human touch in the travel and tourism experience.
Example Answer 2:
Over the next decade, artificial intelligence will have a major impact on the travel and tourism industry. AI tools will
be used to provide hyper-personalised recommendations for travellers, allowing companies to tailor suggestions
based on individual interests and budgets. AI chatbots and virtual assistants will become ubiquitous, helping tourists
research, book, and manage trips. AI could also help optimise routes and itineraries, reducing transit times and
creating more seamless journeys. Behind the scenes, AI will enable businesses to forecast demand more accurately,
adjust pricing dynamically, and target marketing campaigns more precisely. But while AI will streamline many
processes, human oversight and creativity will still be essential for delivering meaningful and memorable travel
experiences.
Q : Are any of the below holiday photos generated by AI ?
1 2
QUIZ
3
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 35
ANNEX : AI TERMINOLOGY
AI has introduced many new concepts and technical terms into business and everyday language. The below
table summarises some key terms that would be helpful for every business leader to have a basic appreciation
of at a high level. By understanding the basics of these concepts it will help to ground AI systems into
practical situations that business leaders can relate to.
Description Examples
Narrow AI
Narrow AI (sometimes called weak AI)
is a type of AI that is designed to only
perform a specific task, or set of tasks.
Examples of narrow AI include smart
speaker voice assistants, computers
capable of playing chess, or AI medical
systems able to analyse images and detect
cancer.
These are narrow AI examples as they are
only able to perform tasks that they have
been specifically trained for – for example
the AI medical imager is not able to also
play chess.
Business leaders could use narrow AI
systems to automate tasks such as
repetitive data entry, transcribing speech,
or recommending products.
General AI
General AI (sometimes called strong
AI, of Artificial General Intelligence
[AGI]) is a type of AI that is designed
to perform any intellectual task that an
‘average’ human can do.
Whilst sophisticated AI chatbots have
been trained with very large non-topic
specific datasets and are therefore
able to do many impressive things and
recognised by Microsoft researchers as
able to exhibit early “sparks of artificial
general intelligence” 39, true general AI,
which can rival human intelligence in all
aspects, remains a theoretical concept
and has not yet been achieved.
True general AI would also require the AI
to be able to interact with the real world
(to perform tasks humans can do) and
therefore require embodiment – see
next definition.
While AI is advancing rapidly, it is
important for business leaders to
understand the current limitations of
AI to manage expectations. Today’s AI
business applications utilise narrow AI
capable of on an individual task, or set
of tasks, which can enhance or augment
business capabilities.
A true general AI assistant would be
able to perform any office management
task that a human could do and have
transformative capabilities such as fully
autonomous decision making, creative
problem solving skills and an ability to
conduct strategic planning across various
business functions. This does not yet
exist.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 36
Embodiment
Embodiment refers to the concept of
giving AI systems a physical or virtual
form that enables them to interact with
a world. This could involve embedding
AI into robots for interaction with the
physical world, or AI in virtual avatars
that can perceive and act upon a virtual
environment (such as in the ‘metaverse’).
An example of AI embodiment could be
a hotel that implements an AI powered
check in, or concierge robot, to assist
guests in the lobby and interact with them
in a safe and productive way.
Whilst embodiment is required for true
General AI to be realised, this hotel
example is a form of Narrow AI with
embodiment, as the robot is only able to
perform specific tasks – it cannot do all
tasks that a human could do, such as carry
guests’ luggage to their room.
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a type of AI that
involves training algorithms with large
amounts of data, so that a computer
is capable of making predictions, or
decisions.
An email spam filter can be an example
of an AI system using machine learning.
By training an AI algorithm on a dataset
of known spam and non-spam emails, it
can learn to distinguish between the two
and is then able to automatically detect
and filter out new spam messages, even
though it has never seen them before.
Deep Learning
Deep learning is a type of advanced
machine learning, which uses complex
mathematical structures inspired by the
human brain called ‘neural networks’. This
enables a computer to identify complex
patterns in data that would otherwise be
too difficult to identify using traditional
machine learning techniques.
A bank could use deep learning algorithms
to detect fraudulent transactions, by
identifying patterns in complex financial
data.
Predictive AI
Predictive AI is the general term for a
type of AI that uses data with either
machine learning, or deep learning, to
forecast future outcomes or behaviours.
An airline could use predictive AI to
forecast future ticket demands and
optimise its pricing and sales strategy,
or a retailer could use predictive AI to
forecast the future demand for products,
which would help them to make informed
decisions on stock management and
production planning
Generative AI
Generative AI is the general term for AI
systems that can create new and original
material such as text, images, video or
audio, which resembles human created
content.
The roll out of Generative AI capabilities
to the public is widely regarding as
launching the current global interest in
AI.
AI chatbots are a form of Generative AI.
A business could use generative AI tools
to produce product descriptions, press
releases or marketing copy, whereas a
media company could use Generative AI
to compose new music, or develop visual
advertising materials.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 37
Large Language
Models (LLM)
Large Language Models (LLM’s) are a type
of underlying AI architecture that are
specifically designed to understand and
generate human-like language. They are
trained on massive datasets of text and
computer code (hence the name Large
- Language Models) to develop a deep
understanding of language patterns,
grammar and semantics, enabling them
to generate new coherent, relevant and
natural sounding text
Large Language Models (LLM’s) can
perform a wide range of language related
tasks, such as real time translation, writing
documents, or answering questions in an
informative way.
The terms LLM and Generative AI are
sometime used interchangeably, but are
in fact different. An LLM is the underlying
AI model that powers the language
capabilities of a Generative AI system
(such as an AI Chatbot).
Foundational Models
Foundational Models are a broader
category of underlying AI architecture,
which includes LLM’s, but also AI models
trained with more than just text, such as
large datasets of images, video or audio
Foundational models are also referred
to as ‘General Purpose AI’ in the EU 40. However business leaders should
note that EU General Purpose AI are
foundational models able to be applied
to lots of areas and is not the same
as General AI, or Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI) which is described
earlier in this table and refers to AI that
has the full intellectual capabilities of
humans.
Foundational models can serve as the
basis (hence the name Foundational) for
developing more specialised models. They
have wide uses and can be adapted (often
referred to as ‘fine tuned’) with industry
specific data and knowledge.
For example a business may ‘fine tune’
an LLM with its company policies to
create an AI chatbot for its website,
or a manufacturer may fine tune a
foundational ‘vision’ model with specific
product information to automatically
identify defects on its assembly line.
Prompting, Prompt
Engineering and
Prompt Design
Prompting is the process of providing
instructions and examples to an AI
system to guide it towards a desired
output. Prompts could be in the form
of text, images or other types of data,
depending on the AI system and its
capabilities.
How a user prompts an AI system can
significantly influence the outcome and
results and therefore the related field
of Prompt Engineering and Prompt
Design is about experimenting and
carefully crafting prompts to produce
better, safer and more useful results.
For example a marketing team may use
prompt engineering to test multiple
variations of prompts with an AI writing
assistant, so that it generates the best
social media captions that are accurate, in
the desired style and friendly.
Prompts could include information such
as the:
•	 Task: For example to tell a
Generative AI system to write a
poem
•	 Context: For example the genre
of the poem to write
•	 Constraints: For example if there
is a limit to the number of words
A prompt could therefore be: “Write a
limerick poem about AI in less than 20
words”
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 38
Hallucinations
Hallucinations are outputs from AI
systems that may seem real, but are
in fact incorrect, or unrealistic. They
may come as the output from either
Predictive or Generative AI systems
and are most likely to occur when the
AI algorithms have been trained on
incomplete, or inaccurate data.
Hallucinations can be misleading (or even
dangerous) if not properly understood,
but can also be useful for generating
new creative content or exploring new
ideas, such as for drug discovery.
An example of hallucination may be
an AI chatbot providing a false answer,
rather than saying it doesn’t know the
answer to a question, or an AI powered
image recognition system that mistakenly
classifies products, leading to incorrect
order fulfilment.
Hallucinations can sometimes be hard to
spot. For example if an AI system output
that 92 x 53 = 6784 (which is wrong), it
would be hard to spot as a hallucination
without manual verification. Preventing
hallucinations in business commercial
arrangements is especially important. For
example an AI system could incorrectly
give the wrong price to a customer for a
holiday.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 39
Tokens & Parameters
Tokens and Parameters are technical
concepts within AI large language
and foundational models, that do not
need to be understood in detail by
business leaders, but are included here
as the performance of AI systems are
sometimes publicly referred to by their
token and parameter count and can
offer an approximate insight into the
capability of an AI system. It is therefore
useful to have an awareness of these
terms.
In general more tokens and more
parameters usually mean better, with
bigger AI systems able to process, learn
and generate better outputs, but bigger
also means more computing resource,
power, time and money is required to
train and operate the AI system, so it can
also be a trade-off decision.
For example two AI chatbots developed
in the UAE are called Falcon 7B and Falcon
40B which refers to their size of 7 billion
parameters and 40 billion parameters.
Models with smaller parameter counts are
best suited to simpler tasks and tasks that
require rapid responses, whereas models
with very large parameter counts are best
equipped to handle very complex and
highly creative tasks.
It is also useful for business leaders to
understand the basic concept of tokens
and ‘token limits’ when selecting, or
interacting with AI chatbots. A rough ‘rule
of thumb’ is that 1 token = 0.75 words (75%).
Therefore 100 tokens are approximately
equivalent to 75 words.
If for example an AI chatbot states its
combined input and output is limited to
2000 tokens, this means if a user question
(e.g. prompt) is 100 tokens (~75 words), the
maximum output could be 1900 tokens (~
1425 words).
Deliberately implementing token limits can
be disappointing to some and prevent AI
chatbots from generating very long form
outputs (such as many page documents),
but these limitations ensure the AI system
can generate coherent responses, manage
computational resources efficiently, and
generalise well across various contexts.
However ongoing AI research aims to
maintain high quality outputs, with larger
token limits.
Alignment &
Guardrails
Alignment and Guardrails are two
very important concepts related to the
ethical development and deployment
of AI.
Alignment refers to ensuring that AI
systems objectives and behaviours
match human values and goals.
Guardrails can be guidelines, regulations,
or formal constraints implemented to
prevent AI systems from causing harm,
or behaving inappropriately.
As a business leader, it is crucial to
establish alignment by defining the
ethical boundaries for AI usage in your
organisation (such as respecting user
privacy). Implementing guardrails ensures
that AI systems operate within those
defined boundaries.
For example when using an AI recruitment
tool, an alignment mechanism could be
used to ensure the AI system does not
discriminate against certain groups of
people and a guardrail might be used
to prevent the AI system from accessing
certain types of data, such as personal
medical records.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 40
QUIZ ANSWER
Could you identify the AI generated content…?
It was a trick question – all of the text and images were generated by AI !
If you thought any were made by a human, this has hopefully demonstrated the power of AI.
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 41
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
AUTHOR
James McDonald
Director, Travel Transformation
World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC)
CONTRIBUTORS
Julie Shainock
Managing Director, Travel, Transport & Logistics (TTL)
Microsoft
Shane O’Flaherty
Global Director, Travel, Transportation and
Hospitality
Microsoft
Smith Codio
Director, Customer Experience of Automotive,
Mobility & Transportation Industry
Microsoft
DESIGN
Name
Zoe Robinson
The Voice of Travel & Tourism.
WTTC promotes sustainable growth for the Travel &
Tourism sector, working with governments and international
institutions. Council Members are the Chairs, Presidents
and Chief Executives of the world’s leading private sector
Travel & Tourism businesses.
For more information, visit: www.WTTC.org
Microsoft’s advancements in AI are grounded in our
company’s mission to empower every person and
organisation on the planet to achieve more — from helping
people be more productive to solving society’s most
pressing challenges.
For more information, visit: www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai
Cover: Mahdis Mousavi, Unsplash; Page 2, 3, 12 & 16:
Shutterstock; Page 34 Umberto Few, Unsplash
IMAGES
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 42
ENDNOTES
1 Beatles Now and Then YouTube Video (https://youtu.be/Opxhh9Oh3rg)
2 Guardian – AI in Breast Cancer Screening (https://www.theguardian.com/society/2023/aug/02/ai-usebreast-cancer-screening-study-preliminary-results)
3 Politico – AI in Breast Cancer Screening (https://www.politico.eu/article/ai-improves-breast-cancerdetection-rate-20-percent-swedish-study)
4 WIRED March 2019 – Godfathers of AI Boom Wins Computing’s Highest Honour (https://www.wired.
com/story/godfathers-ai-boom-win-computings-highest-honor )
5 Science News – 90% of Worlds Data Generated in Last 2 Years (https://www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2013/05/130522085217.htm)
6 EU Parliament – AI Threats & Opportunities (https://www.europarl.europa.eu/pdfs/news/
expert/2020/9/story/20200918STO87404/20200918STO87404_en.pdf)
7 CISCO Annual Internet Report 2023 (https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/executiveperspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.html)
8 North America Data Centres (https://cloudscene.com/region/datacenters-in-north-america)
9 Made in China 2025 Roadmap – English Translation (https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/
uploads/t0181_Made_in_China_roadmap_EN.pdf)
10 Reuters – China to Boost Chip Industry (https://www.reuters.com/technology/china-launch-new-40-
bln-state-fund-boost-chip-industry-sources-say-2023-09-05)
11 EU Commission – EU Chips Act (https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/
priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age/european-chips-act_en)
12 US White House Fact Sheet – US Chips & Science Act (https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2022/08/09/fact-sheet-chips-and-science-act-will-lower-costs-create-jobs-strengthensupply-chains-and-counter-china)
13 CNN – Intel CEO Interview (https://edition.cnn.com/2023/01/17/tech/intel-ceo-chip-manufacturingdavos/index.html)
14 Google TPU Accelerate AI Development (https://cloud.google.com/tpu)
15 Google TPU System Architecture (https://cloud.google.com/tpu/docs/system-architecture-tpu-vm)
16 Microsoft AI Supercomputer & Vision for Future of AI (https://news.microsoft.com/source/features/
ai/openai-azure-supercomputer)
17 Microsoft’s AI Supercomputer – YouTube (https://youtu.be/Rk3nTUfRZmo)
18 UK Government - £900M Investment in AI Exascale Computer (https://www.gov.uk/government/
news/government-commits-up-to-35-billion-to-future-of-tech-and-science)
19 UK Government – Bristol University to Host UK AI Supercomputer (https://www.gov.uk/government/
news/bristol-set-to-host-uks-most-powerful-supercomputer-to-turbocharge-ai-innovation)
20 UK Bristol University – Supercomputer for AI Discoveries (https://www.bristol.ac.uk/news/2023/
september/isambard-ai.html)
21 Stanford University Human Centred AI – Foundation Models (https://hai.stanford.edu/news/
reflections-foundation-models)
22 Google Research – Attention Is All You Need (https://research.google/pubs/pub46201)
23 G7 Towards a Common Understanding of Generative AI (https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-andtechnology/g7-hiroshima-process-on-generative-artificial-intelligence-ai_bf3c0c60-en)
24 Sequoia Capital – Generative AI Market Map (https://www.sequoiacap.com/article/generative-ai-acttwo)
25 ITU Statistics (https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx)
26 ITU Measuring Digital Development 2022 (https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/facts/
default.aspx)
27 UK Government - AI for Development at the UN General Assembly (https://www.gov.uk/
government/news/uk-sets-out-ai-for-development-vision-at-un-general-assembly)
28 ITU Secretary General Speech – UN High Level Political Forum 2023 (https://www.itu.int/en/osg/
Pages/Speeches.aspx?ItemID=18)
29 Randstad Work Monitor Survey (https://www.randstad.co.uk/workmonitor)
30 Randstad Work Monitor Survey – Only 13% Offered AI Training (https://www.randstad.com/
INTRODUCTION TO AI
World Travel & Tourism Council < Contents  | 43
press/2023/over-50-believe-ai-will-future-proof-their-careers-only-13-have-been-offered-ai-training)
31 GitLab Global Software Developer Survey (https://about.gitlab.com/developer-survey)
32 IBM Institute of Business Values AI Survey (https://www.ibm.com/thought-leadership/institutebusiness-value/en-us/report/augmented-workforce)
33 Microsoft Learn (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us)
34 Grow with Google (https://grow.google/intl/uk/courses-and-tools)
35 IBM AI Training (https://www.ibm.com/training/ailearning)
36 IBM Commits to AI Training for Underrepresented Communities (https://newsroom.ibm.
com/2023-09-18-IBM-Commits-to-Train-2-Million-in-Artificial-Intelligence-in-Three-Years,-with-a-Focus-onUnderrepresented-Communities)
37 IBM SkillsBuild (https://skillsbuild.org)
38 YouTube Culture & Trends Report 2023 (https://blog.youtube/culture-and-trends/youtube-culturetrends-report-2023)
39 Microsoft Research Paper – Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence (https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/sparks-of-artificial-general-intelligence-early-experiments-with-gpt-4)
40 EU Parliament – General Purpose AI (https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/
ATAG/2023/745708/EPRS_ATA(2023)745708_EN.pdf)
41 eFootball Graphics Evolution – YouTube (https://youtu.be/_wQ6IGAIqII)
INTRODUCTION TO AI
© World Travel & Tourism Council: Introduction to AI 2024. All rights reserved.
The copyright laws of the United Kingdom allow certain uses of this content without our (i.e. the copyright owner’s) permission. You are permitted to use limited extracts of this content, provided such use is fair and when such
use is for non-commercial research, private study, review or news reporting. The following acknowledgment must also be used, whenever our content is used relying on this “fair dealing” exception: “Source: World Travel and
Tourism Council: Introduction to AI 2024. All rights reserved.”
If your use of the content would not fall under the “fair dealing” exception described above, you are permitted to use this content in whole or in part for non-commercial or commercial use provided you comply with the
Attribution, Non-Commercial 4.0 International Creative Commons Licence. In particular, the content is not amended and the following acknowledgment is used, whenever our content is used: “Source: World Travel and Tourism
Council: Introduction to AI 2024. All rights reserved. Licensed under the Attribution, Non-Commercial 4.0 International Creative Commons Licence.” You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that legally restrict
others from doing anything this license permits.
W T T C S T R A T E G I C P A R T N E R S 